# Fundamental Analysis

Fundamental analysis considers and interprets just about every factor that impacts a company. This represents 80 percent of the focus of Leeds Analysis and is the most important part of finding high-quality penny stocks with great upside potential.

When performing Leeds Analysis on the fundamentals of a penny stock, here is how we proceed:

- Look at the financial results (gives an understanding of the operational situation).
- Look for trends compared to previous quarters and years.
- Generate financial ratios (gives much deeper understanding).
- Compare financial ratios to previous quarters and years.
- Explore other fundamentals considerations (those not related to the financials).

There are also differences among various industries. To be considered strong, a technology company will have very different numbers than a biotech company. For example, it's rare for a biotech to be making any profit at all , while a utility company will generally be profitable. A high-growth company in a high-growth industry can have a share price that is 100 times it's earnings, while the share price of a company in a low-growth industry should be closer to 10 times earnings.

You will gain all the clarity you need by:

- Comparing the company's numbers to previous quarters and annual results
- Comparing the company's numbers to direct competitors and the overall industry
- Using financial ratios
- Comparing those ratios to competitors and the overall industry
- Using your own logic (e.g. revenues of 1 million with expenses of 20 million is really quite a problem!)

## Financial Results

The financials are put together in three reports:

1. Income statement: how much money the company made, and what it cost to make that happen.
2. Balance sheet: what the company owns, and what it owes.
3. Cash flow statement: money coming in and going out, and the change in cash since the last statement.

## The Income Statement

This tells you how much money the company made, what its expenses were, and whether it is operating profitably or at a loss.

The income statement is laid out as follows:

- **Sales/Revenues** represents money the company generated by selling its products and services.
- **Cost of goods/sales** is the costs related to producing products or providing services.
- **Gross profit/income** margin is the difference between income and cost of goods. Gross profit margin can be expressed in dollars or percentage of revenue.
- **Operating expenses** include all overhead and labor expenses associated with the operations of the business, such as research and development costs, administrative and advertising expenses.
- **Net profit/income** is the gross profit margin after deducting operating expenses.

Important number that give the final result of income statement is **Net profit/income**.

## The Balance Sheet

The balance sheet tells you what a company owns and what it owes. It breaks all items down between:

- Assets (cash, investments, real estate, factories, etc.)
- Liabilities (debt, accounts payable, mortgages, etc.)

The balance sheet also divides assets and liabilities between:

- Current (items accessible or due within the next year)
- Long term (items accessible or due, but not for a year or more)

The balance sheet is laid out as follows:

**Assets** (what the company owes and has):

- Current assets (accessible within the next year or less)
- Long-term assets (not easily accessible within the next year)

**Total assets** (the total of all current and long-term assets)

**Liabilities** (what the company is committed to paying and what it owes):

- Current liabilities (to be paid in 12 months or less)
- Long term liabilities (due in a year or more)

**Total liabilities** (the total of all current and long-term liabilities)

You can see how a review of the balance sheet would give you a good picture of a company's financial strength.

A penny stock with **no long-term debt**, **very low liabilities** and **very high assets** is well positioned to operate.

Alternatively, a company that owes (liabilities) as much as it has (assets) is in a very tough situation.

## The Cash Flow Statement

Companies keep track of changes in their money from one period to the next by way of the cash flow statement. All cash generated or used is reported in the following categories:

- **Operating activities**: the effect on cash due to operations, which were the items reported on the income statement.

- **Investing activities**: reports the issuance and repurchase of the company's bonds and stock, as well as any dividend payments.

- **Supplemental information**: reports significant items that did not involve cash, as well as income taxes and interest paid.

By reviewing the cash flow, you knew to avoid this company while other investors bought into the company's revenue and earnings successes and probably would be scratching their heads as the shares sank.

Some examples of cash flow items include, but are not limited to:

- Effect of financings or stock offerings
- Dividends paid out
- Adjustments for changes in foreign exchange rates
- Capital expenditures
- Investments
- Borrowings

Generally, on cash flow statement you want to see:

- Items that add to the overall cash flow
- Improvement (increase) in these positive items from year to year
- Few items that detract significantly from overall cash flow
- Improvements (decrease) in these negative items from year to year
- A net positive increase in cash from one year to the next

The cash flow statement help:

- Accounting personnel
- Potential investors
- Creditors and lenders
- Customers, employees, and contractors

When performing Leeds Analysis, look into the significant numbers on the cash flow statement and make sure that they are make sense, and are moving in the right direction, and are advancing the company forward.

## Good Numbers

Every number you look at needs to be considered in relation to:

- The company's competitors
- Its industry
- The previous quarterly report
- The same quarter from the prior year
- The previous years

Take a look at possible financial ratios by industry group in the spreadsheet. This will give you a better idea of the ratios you might expect to see.

**Percent ROS**: return on sales ratio, expressed as a percentage.
**Percent ROA**: return on assets ratio, expressed as a percentage.
**Quick ratio**: current assets (less inventories) divided by current liabilities.
**Current ratio**: current assets divided by current liabilities.

## Accounting Magic

Common practice of treating certain items (expenses, payments) in ways that are better for the company. This is done:

- Make the financial results look stronger.
- Defer or minimize tax payments.  
- Write off more costs.
- Create the appearance of growth, improving financials, or positive momentum.

## Trends in Financial Results

The most important aspect of financial results is their trends.

There are three timeframes to financial results that you can use to uncover the trends:

1. Previous results (last quarter, same quarter las year, previous years)
2. Current results (most recent filing)
3. Upcoming expectations (company issued guidance, or estimates of analysts)

If you are reviewing a company's most recent quarterly financial, you will want to compare them to:

- The previous quarter
- The same quarter from the previous year

## Financial Ratios

Financial ratios are very simple yet highly valuable calculations that can really tell you a lot about a company.

The most common financial ratio, which you have probably heard of before, price/earnings, most widely known as the P/E ratio. It is as simple as it looks. You divide the price of the shares by the company's latest annual earnings.

A company that trade at $10 a share, and last year had earnings of $2, will have P/E ratio of 5 ($10/$2 = 5).

Ratios reveal as a great deal about a company. When you are looking into them, make sure to keep these two points in mind:

1. A ratio is just one number divided by another, and is certainly less complicated than it seems at first. Think them as a "flag" that indicate areas of strength or weakness.
2. There is no correct value for a ratio. Whether a ratio is too low or too high depends on the overall industry, the company's competitors, the strategy of the company, and your own perspective.

Financial ratios will help you:

- Take numbers in context.
- Directly compare them to competitors.
- Directly compare them to the companies of much different sizes.

## Trends in Financial Ratios

When you look at a penny stock's financial results, you then:

- Look at trends from previous results.
- Develop an expectation for future results.
- Compare the results to the competition, industry, and overall market.

Similarly, when you calculate financial ratios (price/earnings, profit margin, etc.) you should:

- Compare the ratios to previous periods.
- Generate expectations for what the upcoming ratios will look like.
- Compare these to the competition, industry, and overall market.

## Additional Fundamental Factors

### Industry

The industry in which company is engaged should make a big difference in your analysis. For example, if a cement plant is losing money every year, that is a bad sign, where as a biotech company taking annual losses is generally expected.

If the average P/E ratio for a company is certain industry group is 20, you can get a better idea of whether the stock you are looking into is a strong or weak on that basis.

The same holds true for every aspect of the financials, and they should all be contrasted against the overall average for the specific industry.

### Trends

In the investment game, the goalposts will continually moving. Over the months and years, you will see changes in:

- The direction of the economy
- The priorities of consumers
- The policies of governments (local/states/national wide/international)
- People's habits, beliefs, and activities
- The presidential office and senate

If you can predict the result of shifting trend, then there will be usually be opportunities for you as penny stock investor.

There are four primary trends that can impact your investment analysis and the companies you may be investing in:

1. Social
2. Political
3. Industrial
4. Consumer

Also considered

- Military (focus, spending, deployment regions)
- Investor activity
- Religious beliefs
- Medical (treatments)
- Medial (patient knowledge)
- Technology adoption

### Social Trends

Social trends are about what people do, and have, and want, what they wear, how often they shop, what types of foods they eat (don't eat), and so on.

### Political Trends

Your job as an investor is to look for the results that will come out of shifts in the underlying political situation.

### Industry Trends

There are industry-specific trends, and at the same time each industry is affected by major countrywide and worldwide trends.

### Consumer Trends

This is similar to social trends, except it relates more to the actual activities of consumers. Are people shopping more, going further to buy items, paying more on average, asking for refund less often? etc.

### Management

Who's steering the ship? This may be the most important aspect of any publicly traded company. Look at the leadership of company: Look at the stock management team:

    - Age/Health
    - History/previous career
    - Ethics
    - Warning signs
    - Management changes
    - Connections
    - Additional responsibilities
    - Personal life

### Risk

There are two types or risk when investing in any publicly traded company: company risk and market risk.

Company risk represents all the factors may hurt the underlying shares price. eg. pending lawsuits against it, high burn rate, 101 year old CEO, etc.

### Competition

Competition is strangely overlooked in many people's analysis.

There are four aspects to competition:

1. Market share
2. Momentum/Trends
3. Barriers to entry
4. Competitive advantages

### Market Share

The percentage of sales that a company captures, out of the total sales for the industry, is it's market share. If the total market for skipping ropes is $100 million per year, and the company sells $5 million worth, then it has a 5 percent market share.

This is a quick way to gauge relative size between competitors. Over time, it is also the best way to know whether a company is taking away market share from its competition, or losing out over time.

### Momentum / Trends

Keep an eye on trends (increasing/decreasing), especially when compared to the competition. You want to look for:

- An increasing overall market
- Improving market share
- Drops in market share among the competition

### Barriers to Entry

The worst kind of competition is new competition. If a company is working on handling the competitors it already has, the last thing it wants to encounter is a new player throwing itself into the fray.

### Competitive Advantages

Competitive Advantages allow a company to produce its wares from less, sell its product for more, or gain market share with lower effort.

A strong competition advantage:

- Results in easier customer acquisition.
- Allows for faster production.
- Enables a company to charge more.
- Enables a company to produce for less.
- Makes life difficult for the competition.

### Customers

- Diverse
- Loyal
- Numerous

When performing Leeds Analysis, look for a customer base that is:

- Growing in numbers
- Growing in purchase amounts
- Increasing frequency of repeat purchases
- Paying more per order
- Remaining loyal over the years
- Numerous (the more customers the better)

### Intellectual Property

Patents, trademarks, and copyrights all play a role in any company.

### Legal Issues

One factor that can derail a penny stock is a lawsuit. Even the expense of legal proceedings can be too much to bear for a small company. Or damage the penny stock when they cannot afford lawsuits.

### Press Releases (Public Relations/Investors Relations)

Press releases can really throw a company's share price around. The right "just-awarded contract" or high level customer win, or patent award can cause the share price to multiply in value. 

## How To Research Fundamental Analysis

EPS: http://www.benzinga.com/stock/cvo/earnings

Financial earnings: http://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/cvo/financials/income/quarter

Breaking news: http://seekingalpha.com/symbol/CVO/news

Financial Ratios by Industry Group:
https://biz.yahoo.com/p/sum_conameu.html


Personal note:
