# Fundamental Analysis

Fundamental analysis considers and interprets just about every factor that impacts a company. This represents 80 percent of the focus of Leeds Analysis and is the most important part of finding high-quality penny stocks with great upside potential.

When performing Leeds Analysis on the fundamentals of a penny stock, here is how we proceed:

- Look at the financial results (gives an understanding of the operational situation).
- Look for trends compared to previous quarters and years.
- Generate financial ratios (gives much deeper understanding).
- Compare financial ratios to previous quarters and years.
- Explore other fundamentals considerations (those not related to the financials).

There are also differences among various industries. To be considered strong, a technology company will have very different numbers than a biotech company. For example, it's rare for a biotech to be making any profit at all , while a utility company will generally be profitable. A high-growth company in a high-growth industry can have a share price that is 100 times it's earnings, while the share price of a company in a low-growth industry should be closer to 10 times earnings.

You will gain all the clarity you need by:

- Comparing the company's numbers to previous quarters and annual results
- Comparing the company's numbers to direct competitors and the overall industry
- Using financial ratios
- Comparing those ratios to competitors and the overall industry
- Using your own logic (e.g. revenues of 1 million with expenses of 20 million is really quite a problem!)

## Financial Results

The financials are put together in three reports:

1. Income statement: how much money the company made, and what it cost to make that happen.
2. Balance sheet: what the company owns, and what it owes.
3. Cash flow statement: money coming in and going out, and the change in cash since the last statement.

## The Income Statement

This tells you how much money the company made, what its expenses were, and whether it is operating profitably or at a loss.

The income statement is laid out as follows:

- **Sales/Revenues** represents money the company generated by selling its products and services.
- **Cost of goods/sales** is the costs related to producing products or providing services.
- **Gross profit/income** margin is the difference between income and cost of goods. Gross profit margin can be expressed in dollars or percentage of revenue.
- **Operating expenses** include all overhead and labor expenses associated with the operations of the business, such as research and development costs, administrative and advertising expenses.
- **Net profit/income** is the gross profit margin after deducting operating expenses.

Important number that give the final result of income statement is **Net profit/income**.

## The Balance Sheet





## How To Research Fundamental Analysis

EPS: http://www.benzinga.com/stock/cvo/earnings

Financial earnings: http://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/cvo/financials/income/quarter

Breaking news: http://seekingalpha.com/symbol/CVO/news



Personal note:
